THE FOLLOWING PROGRAM IS
MADE POSSIBLE IN PART BY
FUNDING FROM THE SOUTHERN
ALLIANCE FOR CLEAN ENERGY.
AND CLEAR THE AIR.
OF THE MANY THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE TOURING
THE NORTH CAROLINA
OUTER BANKS EACH YEAR,
FEW PEOPLE APPRECIATE
THE RAW BEAUTY HERE
AS MUCH AS NATURE
PHOTOGRAPHER,
MICHAEL HALMINSKI.
WELL, THE
OUTER BANKS,
IT'S ON THE
ATLANTIC FLYWAY.
IT'S A MAJOR STOPPING
POINT FOR MIGRATORY BIRDS
- ALL TYPES OF BIRDS, WE
SEE HAWKS AND SONGBIRDS,
ALL THE TYPES OF
DUCKS AND GEESE.
FROM HIS FINE ART GALLERY
ON HATTERAS ISLAND
MICHAEL'S IMAGES
COMMUNICATE TO VISITORS
THE VISUAL SPLENDOR OF THE
UNIQUE MARINE ENVIRONMENT
THAT IS THE OUTER BANKS.
...AND IF YOU WERE A BIRD
UP IN THE AIR, FLYING,
AND YOU'RE MIGRATING
NORTH OR SOUTH
AND YOU LOOK DOWN, YOU
HAVE ALL THIS WATER AROUND
AND THEN HERE'S THIS
LITTLE PATCH OF LAND,
A LITTLE STRIP OF SAND
WITH SOME VEGETATION ON IT.
IT'S LIKE A MAGNET
FOR THE WATER FOWL.
AS SEEN FROM SPACE,
A SATELLITE VIEW
GLIMPSES THE OUTER
BANKS AS THEY ARE -
A DELICATE
NECKLACE OF LAND.
A MULTI-BILLION DOLLAR
TOURISM INDUSTRY HAS
GROWN UP ALONG NORTH
CAROLINA'S SANDY JEWEL.
PEOPLE COME TO FISH, TO
SURF, TO SIMPLY BE HERE.
AND MANY COME TO LIVE.
THE HIGHLY PRIZED
OCEAN FRONT PROPERTIES
OCCUPY THE FRONT LINE
WHENEVER GREAT STORMS
ROLL IN FROM
THE ATLANTIC.
THE AREA IS VULNERABLE TO
AN ARRAY OF ENVIRONMENTAL
STRESSORS, INCLUDING
OVER-DEVELOPMENT.
BUT THE
OVER-ARCHING THREAT,
WORSENING ALL OF THESE
PROBLEMS IS GLOBAL WARMING.
ONE OF THE BEST RECORDS
OF CLIMATE CHANGE
COMES FROM MIKE MANN'S
STUDIES OF TREE RINGS
AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF VIRGINIA.
AND HE SHOWS RELATIVELY
STABLE CLIMATE
SINCE THE LAST
GLACIAL PERIOD.
THIS IS THE LAST
TWO THOUSAND YEARS
OF HIS RECORD THAT
SHOWS RELATIVELY
STABLE CONDITIONS OF
EARTH'S TEMPERATURE
FOR A LONG
PERIOD OF TIME.
YOU COULD SEE SOME
ANNUAL VARIABILITY
BUT IT'S NOT
EVER VERY LARGE.
AND THEN A DRAMATIC
SPIKE IN THE RECENT YEARS
AT THE BEGINNING OF THE
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION THAT
CAN BE LINKED TO THE HUMAN
BURNING OF FOSSIL FUELS
AND THE INCREASE IN CARBON
DIOXIDE IN THE ATMOSPHERE.
THOSE INCREASING CO2
LEVELS FIND UNDISPUTED
EVIDENCE IN ICE
CORE SAMPLES.
NO OTHER NATURAL
MECHANISM EXPLAINING THE
OMINOUS TEMPERATURE
SPIKE HAS ATTRACTED
SERIOUS ATTENTION IN THE
SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY.
BUT THE IDEA OF
HUMAN-INDUCED CLIMATE
CHANGE, WHILE OVER A
CENTURY OLD, DID ENCOUNTER
YEARS OF RESISTANCE IN THE
COURT OF PUBLIC OPINION.
IT'S NOT SURPRISING TO ME
THAT IT TOOK THAT LONG.
THIS IS A VERY DIFFICULT
SCIENCE TO TRY TO PREDICT
THE CLIMATE OF A PLANET,
BOTH THE PAST AND IN THE
FUTURE, AND I THINK WHAT
WE'VE SEEN IS A VERY
HEALTHY DEVELOPMENT OF
THAT SCIENCE OVER THE
LAST 35 YEARS LEADING
TO OUR CONSENSUS NOW.
CONSENSUS AMONG
SCIENTISTS...
A GROUNDSWELL OF
PUBLIC SUPPORT...
IT APPEARS GLOBAL WARMING
IS ON EVERYONE'S MIND
AS THE MASS MEDIA -
INCLUDING COVER STORIES
FROM CONSERVATIVE
MAGAZINES AND INTERVIEWS
WITH CONSERVATIVE
POLITICIANS ON CNN
- HAVE BROUGHT THE
GLOBAL WARMING STORY
INTO THE MAINSTREAM.
WHAT WILL AND WHAT DOES
GLOBAL WARMING MEAN
TO THE INHABITANTS
OF THE OUTER BANKS?
TO ALL RESIDENTS
OF NORTH CAROLINA?
I SEE SEVERAL AREAS IN WHICH
CITIZENS OF NORTH CAROLINA
ARE FEELING CLIMATE
CHANGE AND WILL FEEL IT
AS THE PLANET GETS WARMER
IN THE NEXT SEVERAL DECADES.
ONE OF THESE, OF COURSE,
IS SEA LEVEL RISE.
AS POLAR ICE CURRENTLY
SITTING ON LAND MASSES
MELTS AWAY INTO THE SEA,
SCIENTISTS PREDICT THAT
BY THE YEAR 2100 OCEAN
LEVELS WILL HAVE RISEN
BY AS HIGH
AS 43 INCHES.
WHEN ONLY AN INCH RISE CAN
SINK THE LOWEST LYING AREAS,
THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL
WARMING IN NORTH CAROLINA
MEANS A DRAMATICALLY
RE-DRAWN COASTLINE.
BYE-BYE OUTER BANKS.
TRUE OLD-TIMERS, LIKE
FISHERMAN I.D. MIDGETT,
ARE ALSO CONCERNED.
THEY KNOW
TIME IS SHORT
AND THE OUTER BANKS
ARE VULNERABLE.
WELL, IT'S REALLY
NOTHING MORE THAN A REEF
WHICH SEPARATES THE
OCEAN FROM THE MAINLAND,
AND PROTECTS THE MAINLAND,
REALLY, IN A SENSE.
OF COURSE, IF WE GET
A RISE IN WATER LEVEL,
WE'RE SUNK.
STORMS PROBABLY WHERE
WE'RE STANDING NOW
WOULD BE OVER
FIVE FOOT DEEP
- PROBABLY ARMPIT
DEEP OR MORE.
HURRICANES I'M
TALKING ABOUT.
WHILE STORMS ARE A FORCE
OF NATURE THAT HAVE LONG
ATTRACTED PHOTOGRAPHERS
LIKE MICHAEL HALMINSKI,
NOBODY WOULD WISH THE
KIND OF DESTRUCTION
HE HAS WITNESSED
ON HATTERAS ISLAND
AS FROM
HURRICANE ISABEL.
WHILE SCIENTISTS DON'T
AGREE ON JUST HOW GLOBAL
WARMING WILL IMPACT
HURRICANE SEASON ON THE
OUTER BANKS, IT'S THE
DE-STABILIZATION OF THE
WEATHER AND THE PROSPECT
OF FAR MORE INTENSE
HURRICANES THAT HAS
EVERYONE CONCERNED.
A WARMER NORTH CAROLINA
WILL UNDOUBTEDLY BE
A DRIER NORTH CAROLINA.
I EXPECT THAT GREATER
RATES OF EVAPORATION
WILL LEAVE DRIER SOILS.
AND, OF COURSE, WATER IS
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
MOST CONCERNS A FARMER IN
THE SUCCESS OF THE CROP
IN ANY PARTICULAR YEAR.
WHILE EVEN THE MOST
ROBUST COMPUTER MODELS
LEAVE SCIENTISTS UNCERTAIN
OVER THE EXACT DEGREE OF
FLOODING AND RISING SEAS,
THE NUMBER OF HURRICANES,
AND A LONG LIST OF DIRECT
AND INDIRECT IMPACTS ON
PEOPLE, ANIMALS, AND THE
ENVIRONMENT, WHAT IS CLEAR
IS THAT IF SOMETHING ISN'T
DONE TO LIMIT AND LOWER
GLOBAL WARMING POLLUTION,
THAT THE BIGGEST LOSERS IN
THIS DANGEROUS EXPERIMENT
WITH EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE
ARE HUMANS, AND OUR
TREASURED RESOURCES.
SO THERE ARE CHALLENGES
WITH GLOBAL WARMING,
BUT THERE ARE ALSO
OPPORTUNITIES.
AND IF BUSINESSES SEIZE
THESE OPPORTUNITIES
WE WILL SEE INNOVATION
FLOW FORWARD.
THAT'S WHY WE'RE
SEEING BUSINESSES
LIKE GENERAL
ELECTRIC, DUPONT,
AND BRITISH PETROLEUM
PROVIDE LEADERSHIP.
BUT WE NEED OTHER
SECTORS TO ENGAGE,
LIKE THE
AGRICULTURE SECTOR
WHERE THEY CAN
ACTUALLY GROW FUELS
WHERE WE USED TO
MINE FOSSIL FUELS
AND THAT WILL PROVIDE
CLEANER SOURCES OF ENERGY
THAT REDUCE GLOBAL
WARMING POLLUTION.
THIS INNOVATION
WILL NOT HAPPEN
WITHOUT GOVERNMENT
INVOLVEMENT.
VOLUNTARY MEASURES
DON'T WORK.
TIME AND TIME AGAIN WE'VE
SEEN WHERE THE GOVERNMENT
SETS THE RULES OF THE
ROAD, INDUSTRY RESPONDS
WITH TECHNOLOGY
AND INNOVATION.
THE BEST EXAMPLE IS THE
ACID RAIN PROVISIONS
OF THE CLEAN AIR ACT.
WE HAD SUCCESS THERE; WE
CAN HAVE SUCCESS AGAIN
USING THE SAME MEASURES FOR
GLOBAL WARMING POLLUTION.
BUT WE'RE GONNA NEED
GOVERNMENT LEADERSHIP,
INVOLVEMENT AND
INNOVATION FROM INDUSTRY,
AND THE SUPPORT
OF EVERY CITIZEN.
MORE THAN
ANYTHING ELSE,
IT'S PROBABLY JUST
A WAY OF LIFE.
BUT I DO APPRECIATE
THE EARLY MORNING
IN SILENCE
AND TRANQUILITY.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT'S
INGRAINED IN YOU, I GUESS.
JUST A LOVE OF THE
LAND I SUPPOSE.
IF NORTH CAROLINIANS
CHOOSE TO FIGHT AGAINST
A FUTURE LARGELY DEFINED
BY GLOBAL WARMING,
A CHIEF MOTIVATION WILL
BE OUT OF SELF INTEREST.
BUT WE SHOULD CONSIDER
A HIGHER CALLING,
AND THAT IS PROVIDING
GOOD STEWARDSHIP
OF OUR TREASURED PLACES
FOR I.D. MIDGETT
AND ALL NORTH
CAROLINIANS ALIKE...
- PLACES LIKE THE
LOVELY OUTER BANKS.
IT'S OLD-TIMEY DAY
AT MOUNT HORR AFRICAN
METHODIST CHURCH
HELD UNDER ITS GRAND LIVE
OAKS ON EDISTO ISLAND.
GOD HAS CALLED US TO BRING
ALL OF CREATION BACK
TO HIM AND TO LOVE AND
RESPECT ALL CREATION...
THEY WORSHIP GOD AMID
THE VERY SPLENDOR
OF HIS CREATION.
IT'S AN OLD
LOW-COUNTRY TRADITION
HERE IN SOUTH CAROLINA.
WHEN OUR FOREFATHERS
WERE IN SLAVERY
AND EVEN AFTERWARDS,
THERE WAS A GREAT
CONNECTION WITH NATURE,
AND THAT BASICALLY IS AN
OLD AFRICAN TRADITION.
LIVING OFF THE LAND, BEING
ONE WITH THE LAND, BEING
IN HARMONY AS A
PART OF CREATION
BUT NOT A
MASTER CREATION.
AND SO THAT TYPE OF
THINKING CONTINUED ON
IN OUR
RELIGIOUS THOUGHT.
THESE ARE OUR
TREASURED PLACES.
TO THE PEOPLE OF EDISTO
ISLAND AND THE ACE BASIN,
IT'S THEIR MAGICAL DEEP
WATER CREEKS AND MARSHES.
TO RESIDENTS
OF HILTON HEAD,
IT'S AN EARLY MORNING
ROUND OF GOLF.
RESIDENTS AND VISITORS
ALIKE TREASURE ALL THAT IS
HISTORIC CHARLESTON.
AND TUCKED AWAY IN A
REMOTE CORNER OF THE
UPSTATE, SOUTH CAROLINIANS
ENJOY HIKING AND CAMPING
ALONG MOUNTAIN TRAILS AND
SAVOR ANY OPPORTUNITY TO
FISH THE LOVELY STREAMS OF
THE SOUTHERN APPALACHIANS,
EVEN WHEN THE TROUT
AREN'T BITING.
WELL, THAT'S WHY THEY
CALL IT "FISHING"
AND NOT "CATCHING".
BUT THAT'S NOT REALLY THE
MOST IMPORTANT THING.
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING
IS GETTING OUT HERE AND
ENJOYING NATURE, SEEING
THE BEAUTY OF THE PLACE,
AND EXPERIENCING SOLITUDE,
AND GETTING AWAY FROM
THE HECTIC STRESS
OF MODERN DAY LIFE.
THE PLEASANT SUNNY WEATHER
BELIES A TROUBLING REALITY
LOOMING ON
THE HORIZON -
THE MUCH TALKED ABOUT
ISSUE OF GLOBAL WARMING.
IT'S BEEN ALL OVER THE
MEDIA; A RASH OF MAGAZINE
COVER STORIES, AND
GLOBAL WARMING RECEIVES
EVER-INCREASING
TELEVISION NEWS COVERAGE.
BREAKING NEWS OVERNIGHT...
UNSTOPPABLE...
1500 OF THE WORLD'S TOP
EXPERTS ANNOUNCE THE
GLOBAL WARMING GENIE
IS OUT OF THE BOTTLE.
VIDEO IMAGES OF FAR
AWAY MELTING ICE CAPS
PLAY ACROSS THE SCREEN.
SO WHERE DOES THE
ISSUE OF GLOBAL WARMING
SIT WITH THE PEOPLE
OF SOUTH CAROLINA?
SPORTSMEN IN SOUTH
CAROLINA ARE RESPONSIBLE
FOR BRINGING OVER
ONE BILLION DOLLARS
INTO OUR
STATE ANNUALLY.
IN FACT, ONE OUT OF EVERY
FOUR SOUTH CAROLINIANS
EITHER HUNT OR FISH,
SO WHAT BETTER GROUP
TO GO TO, TO ASK
ABOUT GLOBAL WARMING?
THIS SPRING WE CONDUCTED
A POLL IN SOUTH CAROLINA,
A RANDOM SAMPLING
OF LICENSE HOLDERS.
WE ASKED THEM WHAT
THEY THOUGHT ABOUT
GLOBAL WARMING.
68% BELIEVE THAT
GLOBAL WARMING EXISTS,
THAT SAME GROUP BELIEVE
THAT IT'S BEING CAUSED
BY THE BURNING OF
FOSSIL FUELS AND,
MORE IMPORTANTLY, THEY
WANT TO SEE ACTION.
NOT ONLY ON THE NATIONAL
LEVEL, BUT 90% OF THEM
WOULD ENDORSE A
STATE ENERGY PLAN.
SO WHO ARE THESE
SPORTSMEN?
WELL, THEY'RE BASICALLY
CONSERVATIVES.
CONSIDERING THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION'S
RESISTANCE TO THE IDEA
OF HUMAN INDUCED CLIMATE
CHANGE, THE POLL RESULTS
COME AS A MAJOR SURPRISE.
ABOUT 70% OF THOSE POLLED
BY THE SOUTH CAROLINA
WILDLIFE FEDERATION
VOTED FOR GEORGE BUSH
IN BOTH ELECTIONS.
AND BECAUSE OF THAT
THEY FEEL THEY HAVE
THE RIGHT TO ASK FOR
IMMEDIATE ACTION.
THERE ARE 90% OF
THEM THAT WANT TO SEE
IMMEDIATE ACTION
ON A NATIONAL LEVEL.
WHILE SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
IN THE WEATHER OF A PLANET
USUALLY OCCUR IN
GEOLOGICAL TIME SPANS,
A DISTURBING ASPECT
OF THE PRESENT WARMING
IS HOW RAPIDLY
IT IS OCCURRING.
EVEN IN THE COURSE
OF A HUMAN LIFE SPAN;
SOUTH CAROLINA'S OLD
TIMERS NOTE THE CHANGES.
BUT IT WAS COLDER THEN,
IT DEFINITELY WAS.
I HAVE SEEN CHATTOOGA
RIVER FROZE OVER AND
THERE STILL ARE PLACES WHERE
YOU COULD WALK ACROSS.
AND OLDER PEOPLE THAN ME
HAVE TOLD ABOUT DRIVING
A YOKE OF OXEN OR A
TEAM ACROSS THE FROZE...
I NEVER SAW THAT,
BUT I'VE SEEN IT
COLD ENOUGH FOR IT
TO BE FROZE OVER.
WHILE GLOBAL WARMING SPELLS
TROUBLE THE WORLD OVER,
ITS CONSEQUENCES WILL
BE FELT RIGHT HERE
ON THE SHORES OF
THE PALMETTO STATE.
BRINGING PROBLEMS THAT
WILL RIPPLE INLAND,
AFFECTING EVERYONE
AND EVERYTHING
FROM OUR TREASURED
NATURAL PLACES
TO OUR VERY
LIVELIHOODS.
WE WERE CONTACTED BY SOME
PEOPLE WHO ARE TUNED IN
TO WHAT'S GOING ON
IN THE ENVIRONMENT
AND THE BIGGER
BUSINESS COMMUNITY,
SPECIFICALLY THE
INSURANCE INDUSTRY.
AND WHAT WE WERE HEARING
WAS THAT INSURANCE
COMPANIES WERE STARTING TO
MODEL FOR GLOBAL WARMING
AND WHAT THAT WAS GOING TO
MEAN FOR INSURANCE RATES.
AND THAT WAS GOING
TO IMPACT ANYBODY
WHO HAS A BUSINESS
ALONG OUR COAST.
WELL, MOST OF OUR
BUSINESS ALONG THE
SOUTH CAROLINA COAST
ARE SMALL BUSINESSES.
THESE SMALL BUSINESSES
SUPPORT THE STATE'S
NUMBER ONE INDUSTRY -
TOURISM - AND 60% OF THAT
BUSINESS COMES FROM SOUTH
CAROLINA'S COASTAL REGION
- THE GROUND ZERO WHEN IT
COMES TO GLOBAL WARMING.
MELTING ICE IN GREENLAND
AND ANTARCTICA,
SCIENTISTS BELIEVE, WILL
CAUSE SEA LEVELS TO RISE
BY UP TO TWO FEET
AND POSSIBLY MORE
IN THE NEXT
HUNDRED YEARS.
BAD NEWS
FOR AN ECONOMY
LARGELY BUILT
ALONG THE COAST.
SEA LEVEL RISE MEANS
ERODING COASTLINES
AND ENTIRELY REDRAWN
COASTLINES BUT A HIGHER
WATER TABLE ALSO MEANS
YET HIGHER STORM SURGES
FROM HURRICANES, AND
COUPLED WITH INCREASED
HURRICANE INTENSITY ALSO
LINKED TO GLOBAL WARMING,
IT'S A DOUBLE
WHAMMY FOR WHICH
THE ENTIRE STATE
IS UNPREPARED.
REMEMBER
HURRICANE RITA?
WILMA?
AND WILL WE EVER
FORGET KATRINA?
THE ENTIRE COUNTRY
WAS UNPREPARED,
AND WE REMAIN SO.
OKAY, HERE WE'VE GOT
A RESCUE IN PROGRESS...
ENVIRONMENT HAS NEVER
PLAYED LARGE ON THE
NATIONAL AGENDA, BUT
HAVING DOLED OUT OVER
90 BILLION DOLLARS ON
INSURED LOSSES BETWEEN
2004 AND 2005, THE
FIRST INDUSTRY TO BE
HIT IN THE WALLET BY
POTENTIAL IMPACTS
OF GLOBAL WARMING IS
THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY.
AND THEY'RE PAYING
CLOSE ATTENTION.
WHERE THE RUBBER HITS THE
ROAD WITH REGARD TO THIS
ISSUE FOR THE INDUSTRY
IS IN THE QUESTION,
WILL THE FREQUENCY
AND/OR THE SEVERITY
OF HURRICANE ACTIVITY
IN THE NORTH ATLANTIC
IN PARTICULAR FOR US HERE
IN THE UNITED STATES,
WILL THAT BE
MEASURABLY INCREASED
IN A WORLD THAT IS WARMED
BY GREENHOUSE GASES?
THAT IS THE
FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION,
THE MOST VEXING QUESTION
FACING THE INDUSTRY
RIGHT NOW WITH
REGARD TO THE
PROSPECT OF
CLIMATE CHANGE.
THE IMPACTS OF GLOBAL
WARMING ARE MANY,
ARE COMPLEX.
AND WHILE A DESTABILIZED
CLIMATE ISN'T FULLY
UNDERSTOOD, THE PROSPECT
OF ANOTHER KATRINA
STRIKING SOUTH CAROLINA,
STRIKING CHARLESTON,
PROVIDES MORE THAN
ENOUGH REASON TO CARE.
KILLER STORMS THREATEN
THE STATE'S LIFEBLOOD -
TOURISM, AND ITS NUMBER
TWO INDUSTRY - TIMBER
- IS EQUALLY VULNERABLE.
WHEN HURRICANE HUGO
SLAMMED INTO BULL'S BAY
IN MCCLELLANVILLE IN 1989,
MOWING DOWN A 50-MILE
SWATH ALL THE WAY TO NORTH
CAROLINA AND WELL BEYOND,
IT DOWNED THREE
TIMES THE TREES
LOST TO THE MT. ST.
HELEN'S ERUPTION,
SEVEN TIMES THE
YELLOWSTONE FIRES
- AN EIGHT BILLION
DOLLAR LOSS.
FUELED BY INCREASED HEAT
FROM WARMING OCEANS,
MORE FREQUENT AND MORE
INTENSE HURRICANES
COULD MEAN THAT
HUGO-STRENGTH STORMS WON'T
JUST BE A DISTANT MEMORY
FOR SOUTH CAROLINIANS.
THE CONSEQUENCES OF
GLOBAL WARMING EXTEND FROM
FAR AWAY MELTING ICE CAPS TO
SOUTH CAROLINA'S SHORELINE,
ACROSS THE PIEDMONT
AND INTO THE UPSTATE,
INCLUDING DAVE VAN LEAR'S
FAVORITE FISHING HOLE
HERE ON THE UPPER
CHATTOOGA RIVER.
AS A RESULT OF HABITAT
CHANGES, LAND USES,
AND THE DEGRADATION
OF WATER QUALITY,
AND THE INTRODUCTION
OF NON-NATIVE SPECIES,
THE BROOK TROUT HAVE
BEEN RELEGATED TO THE
HEADWATERS OF STREAMS IN
THE SOUTHERN APPALACHIANS.
THEY ARE THE MOST
TEMPERATURE SENSITIVE
OF THE TROUT SPECIES AND
REQUIRE COLD CLEAR WATER.
EVEN IF IMPACTS OF GLOBAL
WARMING AREN'T ALL EXTREME,
WHAT'S AT STAKE ISN'T
SOMETHING ACCEPTABLE
TO ANYONE WITH A CONNECTION
TO THE OUTDOORS.
IF THE WATER'S MUCH ABOVE
70 DEGREES FAHRENHEIT
FOR A PERIOD OF TIME,
THEN THAT WILL KILL
THE BROOK TROUT.
AND IF IT STAYS ABOVE
70 DEGREES FOR WEEKS
IT WILL PROBABLY
DRIVE OUT
THE RAINBOW AND
BROWN TROUT AS WELL.
WHILE EVERY INDIVIDUAL
FROM EVERY REGION IN EVERY
COUNTRY CONTRIBUTES TO THE
PROBLEM OF GLOBAL WARMING
POLLUTION, THE SEARCH FOR
SOLUTIONS RESTS EQUALLY
WITH ONE CARBON-LOADING
HUMAN IN CHINA
JUST AS IN
SOUTH CAROLINA.
THE QUESTION IS
WHETHER WE AS A STATE
WILL RISE TO
THIS CHALLENGE.
AND THE REASON
WE SHOULD -
THE REASONS WE
SHOULD ARE TWO-FOLD.
ONE, THE COST OF NOT
ACTING, THE COST OF
CONTINUING IN THIS CYCLE
OF DEPENDENCE ON FOSSIL
FUELS AND THE IMPACT OF
THAT ON THE LOW COUNTRY.
IT'S SEVEN FEET
ABOVE MEAN SEA LEVEL.
THE COSTS ARE ALMOST
INCALCULABLE.
WE'VE GOT THE POTENTIAL
FLOODING OF THIS CITY,
OF SALT MARSH,
OF RICE FIELDS,
OF THESE LANDSCAPES THAT
ARE ICONIC LANDSCAPES,
THAT ARE A DRAW FOR TOURISTS
BUT ALSO A REFERENCE POINT
FOR PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE
AND HAVE MOVED HERE
AND HAVE LIVED HERE
FOR GENERATIONS.
AND SO, THE COSTS, IT WOULD
NOT BE EVEN POSSIBLE
TO PROPERLY ASSESS THEM.
THE OPPORTUNITIES
ARE SUBSTANTIAL
AND IDENTIFIABLE.
AT CLEMSON UNIVERSITY'S
ENERGY SYSTEMS LABORATORY
THE SEARCH FOR A BREAK
FROM FOSSIL FUEL ENERGY
IS AS MUCH ABOUT CAPITALIZING
ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY
AS IT IS MITIGATING
GLOBAL WARMING POLLUTION.
DR. NICHOLAS RIGAS,
DIRECTOR OF THE
SOUTH CAROLINA INSTITUTE
FOR ENERGY STUDIES
ENJOYS TEACHING
A NEW GENERATION
OF PROBLEM SOLVERS.
SOUTH CAROLINA IS
BEING PROACTIVE
IN DEVELOPMENT OF
ALTERNATIVE CLEAN ENERGIES
AND IT'S BEING ACTIVE
ON SEVERAL FRONTS.
IT'S BEEN ACTIVE ON
THE HYDROGEN FRONT -
WHICH HYDROGEN IS MORE
OF A LONG TERM STRATEGY
FOR THE NATION AS AN
ALTERNATIVE FUEL.
IT'S ALSO BEING ACTIVE
ON THE BIO-ENERGY PIECE.
NOW, SOUTH CAROLINA
CANNOT COMPETE AGAINST
THE MIDWEST IN TERMS OF
CORN PRODUCTION TO...
FOR INSTANCE, ETHANOL.
BUT SOUTH CAROLINA
POSSESSES A LOT OF BIOMASS
THAT CAN BE CONVERTED INTO
BIOETHANOL OR BIODIESEL
VIA NEW TECHNOLOGIES
THAT WILL BE HOPEFULLY
DEVELOPED IN
THE NEAR FUTURE.
SOUTH CAROLINA ALSO
POSSESSES, AND IT'S BEEN
DOCUMENTED, OFFSHORE
WIND POTENTIAL.
THE STATE DOES NOT HAVE
LAND-BASED WIND POTENTIAL
GIVEN ITS LOCATION
AND ITS CLIMATE,
BUT THE OFFSHORE WIND
POTENTIAL OF THE STATE
WHICH RESIDES BETWEEN
FIVE TO 15 NAUTICAL MILES
OFF THE STATE HAS BEEN
DOCUMENTED, SO THERE IS
CONSIDERABLE POTENTIAL FOR
ELECTRICITY GENERATION
OFF THE COAST OF SOUTH
CAROLINA AS WELL.
THEY ARE NEW ECONOMIC
OPPORTUNITIES,
NEW TECHNOLOGIES FOR
ENERGY PRODUCTION,
RENEWABLE ENERGY
PRODUCTION,
NEW TECHNOLOGIES
FOR CONSERVATION,
EXPORTING WHAT WE
KNOW ABOUT WONDERFUL,
EFFICIENT URBAN DESIGN.
CITIES THAT BECOME
WALKABLE, BIKEABLE,
MORE CIVIL AND
CIVIC ORIENTED,
BECAUSE WE DRAW ON THESE
300 YEAR OLD MODELS.
SO CHARLESTON HAS A LOT TO
TEACH AND SOUTH CAROLINA
HAS A MAJOR
ROLE TO PLAY
IN THIS NATIONAL DEBATE
ABOUT GLOBAL WARMING.
THE REALIZATION
IS UPON US.
IT'S HUMAN ACTIVITY,
LARGELY THE BURNING OF
FOSSIL FUELS IN OUR
AUTOMOBILES AND POWER
PLANTS THAT'S RESPONSIBLE
FOR GLOBAL WARMING.
THE PUBLIC IS
READY FOR CHANGE.
AND SEVERAL OF SOUTH
CAROLINA'S MAJOR
INSTITUTIONS ARE GEARING
UP TO HELP POSITION
THE STATE FOR SEIZING
NEW OPPORTUNITIES
IN THE EMERGING
CARBON MARKET.
BUT ANY SOLUTION ALSO
DEPENDS ON ACTION
AND INNOVATION
FROM INDUSTRY.
TIME REALLY IS
OF THE ESSENCE,
AND WE NEED TO SEIZE
THESE OPPORTUNITIES
IN THE EMERGING
CARBON MARKETPLACE.
AND HISTORY HAS SHOWN
US THAT INDUSTRY
DOES NOT RESPOND TO
VOLUNTARY MEASURES ALONE,
SO WE WILL NEED SOME FORM
OF GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION
AND THIS INTERVENTION
MAY COME IN THE FORM
OF INCENTIVES
AND LEGISLATION
AND IN ORDER TO
REALIZE SUCCESS,
WE WILL NEED THE
PARTICIPATION AND EFFORTS
OF GOVERNMENTS,
AND INDUSTRY,
AND EVERY PRIVATE
CITIZEN TO GET INVOLVED.
THAT HUMANS ARE NEGATIVELY
IMPACTING LIFE OVER THE
ENTIRE PLANET RAISES AN
OBVIOUS MORAL QUESTION.
A DEEPLY FELT
CONNECTION TO NATURE
AMONG REVEREND
PINCKNEY'S BRETHREN
UNDERLIES THEIR
SPIRITED SONG
AND MAKES CLEAR
THE TRUEST MEANING
OF GIVING PRAISE
TO GOD'S CREATION.
NATURE IS A PART OF WHO
WE ARE, AND I DON'T THINK
THAT DESTROYING NATURE
IS GODLY AT ALL.
I THINK IT'S HOW
WE MANAGE IT
AND HOW WE LOOK
AND RESPECT IT -
I THINK THAT'S GODLY ABOUT
HOW WE DEAL WITH NATURE.
(SINGING)
AMEN!
SOUTH FLORIDA IS A
TREASURED REGION
OF OUR NATION.
FROM THE EVERGLADES TO THE
KEYS, A VAST WILDERNESS.
PEOPLE COME TO MARVEL
AT ITS WILDLIFE.
ABOVE GROUND...
AND UNDERWATER...
BUT MAINLY, PEOPLE COME
TO RESTORE PERSPECTIVE.
THE KEYS ARE SO UNIQUE.
I CAN START FROM A VERY
FACTUAL POINT OF VIEW
AND SAY, YOU KNOW, IT'S
THE ONLY SUBTROPICAL
PART OF THE
UNITED STATES.
THERE ARE PLANTS AND
THINGS THAT GROW HERE
THAT DON'T GROW ANYWHERE
IN THE UNITED STATES.
BUT IT GOES
BEYOND THAT;
THE KEYS HAS A
MAGICAL SENSE TO IT.
RESIDENTS LIKE FRAN DECKER
HAVE SETTLED IN THE KEYS,
ENJOYING A LIFESTYLE
LARGELY DEPENDENT ON
THRIVING TOURISM.
ONCE A TOURIST HERSELF,
JUANITA GREENE MADE
SOUTH FLORIDA HER HOME
NEARLY HALF A CENTURY AGO.
TAKING IN HER AMAZING
SURROUNDINGS ON THE
ANHINGA TRAIL IN
EVERGLADES NATIONAL PARK,
JUANITA WILL TELL YOU
THERE'S MORE TO THIS
TREASURED PLACE
THAN MEETS THE EYE.
WELL, ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT IT IS
IS THE SILENCE.
YOU KNOW, NO
HORNS AND NO NOISE
EXCEPT THE
NATURAL NOISE.
AND YOU CAN HEAR
THE WIND BLOWING.
LOVERS OF THE OUTDOORS
NATURALLY VALUE
ALL SOUTH FLORIDA
HAS TO OFFER.
BUT SWEEPING TRACTS
OF UNDEVELOPED LAND
MEAN SOMETHING
TO EVERYONE.
THE GREAT, GREAT VALUE OF
THE EVERGLADES IS THAT IT'S
SNUGGED RIGHT UP AGAINST A
HUGE DENSELY POPULATED AREA.
AND EVEN PEOPLE WHO NEVER
COME TO THE EVERGLADES
ARE COMFORTED
WITH THE THOUGHT
THAT THE EVERGLADES
ARE OUT THERE.
THE VALUE OF THE
EVERGLADES -
AND, BY THE WAY, IT IS
A WORLD HERITAGE SITE,
IT'S AN INTERNATIONAL
BIOSPHERE RESERVE AND
IT'S ALSO AN INTERNATIONAL
WETLAND OF IMPORTANCE
- AND MY FEELING IS THAT
EVERGLADES NATIONAL PARK
PROVIDES A VERY
UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY
TO THE RESIDENTS
OF SOUTH FLORIDA.
IT IS THE LARGEST
WILDERNESS AREA
EAST OF THE ROCKIES.
IT IS AN INCREDIBLE
NATURAL AREA.
INSIDERS REFER TO "THE
GREATER EVERGLADES ECOSYSTEM"
MILE UPON MILE
OF INTACT WETLANDS,
A LOW COUNTRY WHERE ONLY AN
INCH OF RISE IN ELEVATION
CAN SPELL THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN GRASSY PRAIRIE
AND WOODED HAMMOCK.
THE SYSTEM, SPANNING
SOME ONE AND A HALF
MILLION ACRES,
HAS ENDURED MUCH,
LOSING 50% OF ITS WATER
FLOW TO NEIGHBORING
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY AND
BURGEONING DEVELOPMENT.
BUT CONFRONTING SOUTH
FLORIDA TODAY THERE'S THE
OVER-ARCHING ENVIRONMENTAL
PROBLEM - GLOBAL WARMING.
YES, GLOBAL WARMING
IS VERY REAL.
AND IT'S NOT SOMETHING
FOR THE FUTURE;
IT'S IN FACT
HAPPENING NOW.
AND, YES, IT WILL HAVE
AN INCREASING INFLUENCE
ON THE EVERGLADES AND
ALL OF OUR COASTAL
AND LOW-LYING
ENVIRONMENTS.
THE POLAR ICE
CAPS ARE MELTING
AS OUR PLANET
HEATS UP.
THAT SPELLS DANGER FOR LOW
LYING AREAS AROUND THE GLOBE.
ESPECIALLY TROUBLING
TO SCIENTISTS
OBSERVING CHANGE
IN SOUTH FLORIDA
IS A DRAMATICALLY EVOLVING
LANDSCAPE ALONG THE COAST.
WE'RE BEGINNING TO SEE
DRAMATIC CHANGES IN THE
BOUNDARY BETWEEN THE
MANGROVE AND WHATEVER'S
BEHIND THEM - EITHER WATER
OR FRESHWATER SWAMP.
AND ALL OF THIS IS BECAUSE,
FOR SOUTH FLORIDA,
FOR INSTANCE, WE
HAVE HAD A RELATIVE
SEA LEVEL RISE OF NINE
TO TEN INCHES SINCE 1930.
THIS IS AN INCREASE IN THE
RATE OF SEA LEVEL RISE OF
EIGHT TO NINE TIMES WHAT
HAD BEEN GOING ON FOR THE
LAST 2000 YEARS AND
THAT'S DRAMATIC -
IT'S CLOSE
TO CATASTROPHIC.
IN THE NEXT 100 YEARS, IF
SOMETHING ISN'T DONE TO
LIMIT AND LOWER GLOBAL
WARMING POLLUTION,
EARTH'S SEAS WILL
CONTINUE TO RISE,
ACCORDING TO DR. WANLESS,
BY ANOTHER TWO FEET.
PARK OFFICIALS
ARE CONCERNED.
I'M CONCERNED ABOUT SEA
LEVEL RISE SINCE RELIEF
HERE IS SO LOW, WE'RE
SEEING AREAS THAT WOULD,
IN FACT, BE INUNDATED
AND CHANGE OF HABITAT
FROM SAW GRASS
PRAIRIE TO MORE
MANGROVE SALT-DOMINATED
ECOSYSTEMS.
ACROSS FLORIDA BAY, MUCH
DAMAGE HAS ALREADY BEEN DONE.
NOW ADD ANOTHER
TWO FEET OF SEA.
THE REDRAWN COASTLINE
SPELLS SIGNIFICANT LOSS
OF WETLAND HABITAT
FOR WADING BIRDS
AND FRESHWATER AQUATICS.
GLOBAL WARMING
MEANS RISING SEAS,
RISING TEMPERATURES,
AND RISING UNCERTAINTY
ABOUT THE WEATHER.
SCIENTISTS ARE CONCERNED
ABOUT THE INCREASED HEAT
RISING OFF THE OCEANS AND
INTENSIFYING HURRICANES.
THIS YEAR, WITH HURRICANES
KATRINA AND WILMA,
IN BOTH THOSE
CASES WE EXPERIENCED
A STORM SURGE HERE AT
EVERGLADES NATIONAL PARK.
IN KATRINA WE HAD A STORM
SURGE DOWN IN FLAMINGO
THAT WAS FROM THREE
TO FOUR FEET
AND THEN SIX WEEKS
LATER, IN WILMA,
WE HAD A STORM SURGE OF
FROM EIGHT TO NINE FEET.
AND I AM CONCERNED THAT
INCREASES IN SEA LEVEL RISE
WOULD EXACERBATE
THOSE KINDS OF IMPACTS.
EVEN IF THE HURRICANE
LEVEL STAYS THE SAME,
WITH RISING SEA
LEVEL WE WILL HAVE
AN INCREASED IMPACT
BY HURRICANES
BECAUSE THEY WILL
REACH FURTHER IN,
THEY WILL MOVE MORE
SAND ON BARRIER ISLANDS,
THEY WILL CUT MORE
INLETS, AND SO ON.
AND SO, EVEN WITHOUT
WORRYING ABOUT THE INCREASE
- LIKELY, IN MY MIND -
INCREASE IN HURRICANES,
WE'RE STILL GOING TO
HAVE A DRAMATICALLY
INCREASED INFLUENCE
FROM HURRICANES.
SOUTH FLORIDA, ITSELF
AN ANCIENT CORAL REEF,
CONNECTS TO THE
COUNTRY'S ONLY LIVING
BARRIER REEF
ENVIRONMENT.
HAVING LOGGED OVER 18,000
DIVE HOURS IN THESE WATERS,
DR. BILLY CAUSEY TREASURES
THE FLORIDA KEYS.
THE KEYS ARE AN
INCREDIBLY SPECIAL PLACE.
AND, IN FACT, THIS
ENVIRONMENT IS UNLIKE
ANY OTHER ENVIRONMENT IN
THE COASTAL UNITED STATES.
CORAL REEFS ARE THE MOST
BIOLOGICALLY DIVERSE
COMMUNITIES IN THE
MARINE ENVIRONMENT
AROUND THE WORLD.
THE NATURAL BEAUTY HERE,
AS ABUNDANT ABOVE WATER
AS BELOW, ATTRACTS
THOUSANDS OF TOURISTS.
AND SOME, FALLING IN LOVE
WITH WILD BEACHES LIKE
BAHIA HONDA STATE PARK,
MAKE THE KEYS THEIR HOME.
THOSE ARE SOME OF MY
ABSOLUTE FAVORITE PLACES
IN THE KEYS.
AND I LOVE BEACHES
AND I LOVE ANYWHERE
WHERE THE OCEAN AND THE
LAND COMES TOGETHER.
AND THAT BEACH TENDS TO BE
KIND OF WILD AND WINDSWEPT.
AS WITH THE REST OF SOUTH
FLORIDA, GLOBAL WARMING
IS TAKING ITS TOLL
ON THE FLORIDA KEYS.
SIGNS ABOVE
GROUND AND BELOW
ALERT MARINE
BIOLOGISTS OF SERIOUS
HEALTH PROBLEMS RELATED
TO WARMING SEAS.
SCIENTISTS ARE CERTAIN
THAT THERE ARE CHANGES
TAKING PLACE, CLIMATE
CHANGES THAT WE ARE
ABLE TO RECORD.
WE'RE SEEING THIS IN THE
CORAL REEF ENVIRONMENT -
THE CORAL REEFS ARE REALLY
THE CANARY IN THE COALMINE
IN THAT WE ARE SEEING
CHANGES TAKE PLACE.
FROZEN ICE CAPS OF THE
ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC
AND CORAL REEFS TOGETHER
REPRESENT THE MOST
STABLE ENVIRONMENTS
IN GEOLOGIC TIME.
CORAL REEFS EXIST IN A
NARROW TEMPERATURE RANGE
- BETWEEN 65 AND 85
DEGREES FAHRENHEIT.
CORAL BLEACHING, WHILE
A NATURAL PART OF A
SYMBIOTIC RELATIONSHIP
SUPPORTING CORAL GROWTH
AND ALGAE, NOW APPEARS
AT UNPRECEDENTED LEVELS
AROUND THE WORLD.
MASSIVE CORAL BLEACHING
EVENTS WERE FIRST OBSERVED
IN THE MID 70'S,
AND THEY HAVE PICKED UP
IN FREQUENCY SINCE THEN
EVOLVING FROM
ISOLATED LOCAL EVENTS
TO REGIONAL TO
GLOBAL IN SCALE.
THE GLOBAL WARMING PART
OF GLOBAL WARMING IS
INCREASED TEMPERATURE, AND
VERY CLEARLY THAT IS GOING
TO BE A DISASTER FOR THE
TROPICS BECAUSE MANY OF
THE ORGANISMS THAT LIVE
IN OUR SHALLOW SEAS
LIKE WARM WATER, BUT THEY
WILL DIE IN HOT WATER.
DYING FISH, MAJOR
LOSSES OF SEA URCHINS,
SPONGES, AND CORALS,
INTENSIFIED HURRICANES
AND RISING SEA LEVELS
INUNDATING AND PERMANENTLY
REDRAWING COASTLINES...
SUCH ARE THE GLOBAL
WARMING IMPACTS THAT
THREATEN OUR MOST
TREASURED PLACES.
SO THERE ARE CHALLENGES
WITH GLOBAL WARMING,
BUT THERE ARE ALSO
OPPORTUNITIES.
AND IF BUSINESSES SEIZE
THESE OPPORTUNITIES,
WE WILL SEE INNOVATION
FLOW FORWARD.
THAT'S WHY WE'RE
SEEING BUSINESSES
LIKE GENERAL
ELECTRIC, DUPONT
AND BRITISH PETROLEUM
PROVIDE LEADERSHIP.
BUT WE NEED OTHER
SECTORS TO ENGAGE,
LIKE THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR,
WHERE THEY CAN ACTUALLY
GROW FUELS WHERE WE USED
TO MINE FOSSIL FUELS,
AND THAT WILL PROVIDE
CLEANER SOURCES OF ENERGY
THAT REDUCE GLOBAL
WARMING POLLUTION.
THIS INNOVATION WILL
NOT HAPPEN WITHOUT
GOVERNMENT
INVOLVEMENT.
VOLUNTARY MEASURES
DON'T WORK.
TIME AND TIME AGAIN
WE'VE SEEN THE GOVERNMENT
SETS THE RULES OF THE
ROAD, INDUSTRY RESPONDS
WITH TECHNOLOGY
AND INNOVATION.
THE BEST EXAMPLE IS THE
ACID RAIN PROVISIONS
OF THE CLEAN AIR ACT.
WE HAD SUCCESS THERE, WE
CAN HAVE SUCCESS AGAIN
USING THE
SAME MEASURES
FOR GLOBAL
WARMING POLLUTION.
BUT WE'RE GONNA NEED
GOVERNMENT LEADERSHIP;
INVOLVEMENT AND
INNOVATION FROM INDUSTRY;
AND THE SUPPORT
OF EVERY CITIZEN.
AS OUR CITIES BALLOON
WITH DEVELOPMENT,
THAT GROWTH CAUSES
INCREASED CONSUMPTION
OF ELECTRICITY,
DRIVING MORE CARS,
AND SHRINKING WILD AREAS
- ALL CAUSING POLLUTION
THAT EXACERBATES
GLOBAL WARMING.
TAKING TIME TO REFLECT,
JUANITA PEERS OUT
ON A SCENE THAT
FOR MANY DECADES
HAS NEVER FAILED TO
LIFT HER SPIRITS.
AND IT'S REAL, IT'S NOT
CONTRIVED; IT'S PART OF
THE NATURAL SYSTEM AND WE
CONNECT TO THE NATURAL
SYSTEM BECAUSE WE'RE PART
OF THE NATURAL SYSTEM
AND WE NEED TO
ASSOCIATE WITH IT.
THAT'S THE SORT OF
THE SPIRITUAL PART
OF THE EVERGLADES, THE
NEED FOR THE EVERGLADES.